>> Kyle Simpson: Let's turn our
attention to recursion now.
And I'm gonna fully state upfront that
I understand recursion can feel quite
intimidating, certainly, for the first
several years that I was a programmer.
I had heard about recursion and
seen it done.
And had no idea nor
any desire to try to tackle it myself.
It seemed a very strange
way of twisting my brain
to think about a problem differently
that I saw no value, no benefit for.
And as a matter of fact, even once I
learned how to do recursion, I didn't
really have a very clear crisp statement
of value for why recursion was necessary.
And it was not until I started digging
into functional programming concepts
that I really began to develop a sense
of why recursion would be useful.
Obviously, there are some functional
reasons, some behavioral or
mechanical reasons why recursion be
helpful with certain kinds of problems.
But I'm talking about
beyond that moment where,
I need to do a recursive
dissent of a binary tree.
Well, that clearly seems more like
recursion than to try to do it
iteratively.
So there are things that recursion is
better at in terms of algorithmic.
But even if we didn't talk about
algorithms, because, quite honestly,
I just don't write a whole lot of
depth first traversal of binary
trees in my everyday coding.
Maybe you do, but
that's not something I do a lot.
So for a long period of time,
recursion felt like this one
little highly specialized tool.
And I wouldn't really pay
that much attention to it.
Several years back,
I heard Doug Crockford give a talk.
He was talking about the new
things coming in ES6.
And he suggested that now that ES6 was
gonna have full proper support for
a thing that we call proper tail calls.
Sometimes, it's often referred to as TCO,
tail call optimization.
He said,
as soon as JavaScript really gets that,
I'm not gonna write loops anymore,
it's what he said.
And it twisted my brain again and
I said, really?
You would never write a loop again,
you would do this only with recursion.
And I knew I academically what he meant.
Because, essentially, the calls in a call
stack, especially if they're recursive,
have the same shape as
the iterations in a loop.
So you can clearly model them, and
they can be thought as isomorphic.
That's a fancy way of saying two different
behaviors represented differently.
The same behavior represented
two different ways.
So you can think recursion and
iteration as sort of isomorphic
to each other in a sense.
But I didn't really ever take
that seriously, like, wow,
I would really do that.
And as I dug more into functional
programming, I saw that, more and
more of the time, problems that I probably
would have defaulted to using a for
loop with, I saw the functional
programming using recursion.
And I began to develop this
deeper appreciation for
why this tool is a necessary part.
It's not just this highly specialized
thing that we should never really take
out of the toolbox, but something that
we should regularly have at reach.
And that means, of course,
that we need to not just have
a very surface level understanding,
but a deep understanding of recursion.
And a deep understanding of
the meaning and the purpose behind it.
If you have any familiarity with math,
if you recall back to math class,
you probably encountered at some point or
another the little sigma symbol
used to describe the summation
of some series of numbers.
Summation of x would literally just say,
from one to whatever you were summing,
add all those numbers up.
And you could say,
summation of x squared or whatever.
And the notation is kind of like
what recursion is doing for us.
And so that's why I wanna
talk about that for a moment.
I really think that the benefit
of recursion is that it moves us
in the direction of declaring what we want
to have happen, that declarative style.
And away from the imperative
of this is how to do it.
So given some list of values that I need
to perform some set of operations on.
Instead of looping over those values to
perform the operation, I could express
that as recursively reducing the list
one at a time, or two at a time.
Or whatever the appropriate thing is,
until I don't have any more items in
the list to process, and then I'm done.
That is the same thing as giving a new
item, when we do that in the call stack,
and each new frame in the call stack
has a shorter list to deal with.
It's the same thing as iterating through
a list where you have an index variable
that's updating.
And there's a lot of things that we can
erase or make less obvious in our code.
There's a lot of details
that can often distract us.
When we move away from that imperative
form and start to declare things.
So it's similar to that sigma symbol,
because a mathematician sees that symbol
and immediately knows what it represents.
At glance I know, okay, I know that's
the sum of that geometric series or
whatever the thing is.
And what I'm hoping is that I
can show you a perspective on
recursion where that starts to become
a little bit more true of your code.
That you declare your
recursion in such a way that,
at glance, somebody can see that and
recognize, I know what that's going to do.
Just like if you had worked with
binary search trees a bunch.
And then you saw somebody implement
a depth first recursive
algorithm to traverse that list.
You probably wouldn't need to
read through each line of that
algorithm to figure out what it was doing.
That would probably just be familiar
enough that you could recognize it.
And I think we can actually go one
step further in terms of not just
that we implement it, but
the style of how we implement it.
To help us get a sense of when I glance
at that, I know what that's doing.
And not just us, but, also,
the other readers of our code.
So consistent with all the other same
principles that we've tried to apply.
We're trying to move from
the imperative to the declarative.
I think recursion is a very
important tool in that mix.
It is our sigma symbol notation,
if you will, to help that part of
the code be more recognizable.
And recursion can certainly be done
poorly, there's no question about that.
But I think, also,
recursion can be done well.
And I think there's as much of an art
to that as there is a science.
So if I start out with
a list of numbers and
I talk about the iterative approach to
that, this is one way you might do that.
If you were given that interview question,
sum up a list of numbers that we pass in.
You might start out with a running
total that var sum = 0 on line 2.
And then simply loop over it and
add the items into the sum, and
then return the sum.
Pretty straightforward,
the terminating condition for you in that,
that stops the loops, is when we've
gone through the whole list of numbers.
Now, that's fairly straightforward.
Certainly probably not
groundbreaking to any of you.
But you might not have ever thought,
what would it mean to sum up
a list of numbers recursively?
And so we need to talk about
two different things here.
One is gonna be the notation choice
that we use, the syntax choice.
And how we name things and position
things, that's one thing to consider.
The other thing to consider is,
algorithmically, what would that mean?
And I was hinting at that
just a moment ago when I said
A loop where the index is moving
through the list can be modeled
generally recursively as the list
getting shorter and shorter.
Because if you think about
a list of five items, and
you move the index from
position 0 to position 1.
If we went about this recursively,
we could say that same list of five items,
let me take the item off the list and
do something with it.
And now I have a shorter list
which is just like if my
index have moved to that position.
So each time I paired down the list,
it's like moving that iterator
through the indexes of the list.
Now when you think about recursion and
if it is one of those topics
that can be intimidating to you.
I think it's often because we try
to get our brains wired up or
wrapped up in the how does it work.
And this is one of those places,
I don't necessarily always say this.
But this is one of those places where
the intent is to actually not worry so
much about how it happens.
The intent is actually to take that
detail of iterating through a list and
processing it item by item.
Take that detail and try to make
it as declarative as possible so
that the engine takes care of that.
And what you're left with is a more
simple statement of the problem.
So if you can twist your brain
to think about recursion as
an isomorphism of the iteration,
as a way of expressing the iteration.
Most of the time you can figure
out a recursive way to express
a solution to any given
problem that you're doing.
Of course if you're not doing iteration,
you might have to get
a little bit more clever.
But most problems involve iteration, and
most iterations can then
be expressed as recursion.
So this summation of numbers.
If I were to take that idea to say,
[COUGH] the way I paired down my list
is to take the first item off the list.
And process it and
then recall myself with a shorter list and
a shorter list and a shorter list.
What would be our terminating condition?
Here our terminating condition is i has
gotten to the last item in the list.
What is our terminating condition
when the list is getting smaller?
>> Kyle Simpson: How about list of
length 0, or length of list 1, I guess,
would be the appropriate
way to think about.
When my list gets down to 1,
I don't need to recurse anymore cuz I've
dealt with all the values, make sense?
Another way to state this if you
were trying to think about it more
mathematically is that the sum of
a list of numbers is the same thing
as the first number plus the sum
of the rest of the numbers.
And you would literally write it out that
way if you were writing the recursive
definition say in mathematical notation.
You'd say the sigma of n is equal
to n plus the sigma of n minus 1.
You'd literally say it like that,
because it implies that there's
a recursive property to this solution.
So let's try to express in
code as much as possible,
let's encode into our code, those ideas.
To try to help our code be as recognizable
of that algorithm as possible.
There's nothing wrong with this algorithm,
it will perform well.
But if someone doesn't know
what the algorithm is doing,
they're going to have to read
through each line to understand it.
That's the hallmark of imperative code.
Can we get to the point where
somebody won't have to obsess so
much about the how, and
recognize the what.
So the first thing I'm gonna
do is try to signal that idea
that there's the first item and
there's everything else.
You might not have seen
the change that I made, but
all I did now was name the first parameter
in the parameter list, and I named it sum.
So now I don't need a variable to
keep track of the rest of the items.
And I'm signalling
something here important,
which is to say, if you were to call
some iteration the function sumIter
with only one value,
it is its own sum right?.
So that's why I named that first parameter
sum as opposed to num1 or something.
I named it sum because in our
base case where there are no
more numbers it is it's own sum.
And my algorithm actually takes care of
that although it's not terribly obvious.
My algorithm takes care of that
because the nums array here
would already be empty if
only I passed in one number.
Which means the for
loop would never even execute.
It would do that initial check for
i less than nums.length, it's not.
When i = 0 nums.length is 0,
it's not less.
So it would never do the for loop, and
what would it do, just return the sum.
So I just tweaked the way I expressed
the same algorithm to begin to try to
signal to somebody,
>> Kyle Simpson: That there's
a recursive nature to the solution
that I'm heading toward okay?
It would not have been obvious
to you to do that except for
the fact that where we're headed
is to try to announce they will.
If that's my iterative solution
what is the recursive equivalent?
So let's think about how every time
some Iter gets called it's automatically
sorta taking the first item off the list
and shortening the list by one item.
That part's already happening for us,
we're not gonna need to
do any of that work.
So really all we need to do is just
process something with the item and sum,
and then call the sumIter with
the remaining nums, if there are any.
So I'm gonna start out my sumRecur
with that exact same signature.
And then I'm going to show that when
I call it I'm doing the same thing.
And you'll notice that there's a match
now between the sum variable and
that first number, 3.
If I didn't pass any of the 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
immediately we would expect it
to just return me back the sum.
So what is our terminating condition,
or in recursive terms,
what is our base condition?
>> Kyle Simpson: How would we know that
the number 3 was the only thing that was
passed in?
>> Speaker 2: Your nums would be empty.
>> Kyle Simpson: If nums.length
is equal to 0, right?
That's our base check, our base case.
And then if nums is greater than 0,
that means there is at least
one number in the list.
Then we need to call the sumRecur
function with that shorter list.
And whatever it returns,
we need to add it to sum.
So let's just encode
that directly in code.
If nums.length = 0 return the sum
otherwise return the sum variable +
the summation of the rest of the list.
>> Kyle Simpson: Now you notice in that
analysis that I'm not really getting all
wrapped up around,
well on the third stacked frame what is
the value of this and the value of that.
And all of those questions that
oftentimes trip people up and
intimidated people with recursion.
I'm really trying to think about it more,
almost from this high level,
almost abstract sense,
it's almost notation.
We're still writing code, but
it's almost notational in nature.
And I'm allowing all of the details of
that stepping through to be encoded in
a couple of different places.
One, I've encoded some of that
information into the parameter list.
I've allowed the parameter list To
suggest that we're gonna pare down one,
the first item off the list each time.
And by the way, there's a name for
that in functional programming.
That's called the head of the list, and
everything else is called the tail.
So I literally could have
called this head,...tail,
if we were trying to use the actual
sort of official terminology.
>> Kyle Simpson: So did you see how
I went about that thought process?
>> Kyle Simpson: It's starting first
with what would if I was gonna do it
iteratively?
And then saying well what's the recursive
algorithm to express the solution problem?
And for things where you're
just looping over a list,
it's usually just reduce the list by one.
Sometimes you reduce the list by two,
or three, or four, or something else.
But generally, the list is gonna get
reduced each time until the list is at
some base condition, like empty, or
one item in it, or two items, or whatever.
Generally that's gonna be the case.
Now there's something
about this expression
of the algorithm that has always,
a bit bugged me.
It's more like an implementation detail,
and generally we shouldn't
get too worried about micro nuances
of performance or implementation.
But there's something that's
always bugged me about this
particular kind of algorithm, because what
you'll note is that if nums is length one.
That is like if I called sumRecur and
I passed in 3 and 4, that's it.
Well, we would not be at a base condition,
because the nums.length is 1.
So what we would do is say return 3.
On line three, we'd say return 3 + and
then we call sumRecur with
just a single item in it.
And that would immediately come
in to the next recursive call,
hit the base condition,
and come right back out.
There's in a sense sort of
a wasted function call.
If I could know now that I don't
really need to pass it in just
to get it right back,
I could save that last function call.
And again the performance difference would
be almost irrelevant especially at scale.
This is really just something
that more bugs me that if
I already know that I've
got this list of numbers,
I kinda already know that addition
always takes two numbers.
I could change this algorithm to say,
why don't I list off the first
two items of the list?
Cuz I'm always gonna be able
to put those two together or
at least take off the first
two items in the list and
if the list is empty then I know all
I need to to do is add them together.
If the list is not empty,
put one of the items back on the list and
send it back in.
Cuz either I'll do those two, or
it'll do however many are left.
So let me just tweak the expression of
this algorithm just slightly again.
And now I've got as you see on line
1 I've got the sum parameter and
the num parameters.
So I've listed the first two items.
So it's kind of like I'm
peeking ahead at the tail.
I'm naming the first item of what we would
normally consider to be the tail and
I'm peaking at it, just to see
if I am really done yet or not.
Just eliminating one recursive step here.
If I'm at the base case where
the numbs is equal to zero,
that let's me know for
sure that I've passed in two numbers,
the sum and the num, so
I just returned sum plus num.
But if nums has more in it,
let me just put that item kind
of back on the tail if you will.
So on line 3, I call sum plus and
when I pass the list I add num back in.
So I just put it back on the stack to
be considered on the next iteration.
I'm really only reducing my
list by one each time but
I'm doing a look ahead to avoid
that last unnecessary call.
And I fully understand that looking at
this you would say that never occurred to
me, why would I ever do that?
It's just a little bit more noise.
Why would I ever do that?
There is a reason for that.
You won't fully understand
that until a little bit later.
But there is a reason why I might choose
to go that route with the expression.
>> Speaker 3: What if you
already passed in one number?
>> Kyle Simpson: I'm glad
you asked that question.
I was just about to say.
There is a subtle point here, which is
that we've eliminated one of the potential
base cases, or at least we're not
covering one of the potential base cases,
which is calling it with only one number.
You can obviously solve that problem
by adding in another if statement.
If sum is a number and num is undefined
then you know you're in that base case.
I'm leaving out those kinds
of more trivial details but
certainly there's lots of
other things you could do.
You could do validation to make sure
that every item is actually a number.
There's a bunch of details that
we're sort of glossing over.
And that is one of them,
is that in choosing to go this direction,
I've implied now that one of
the preconditions to use this utility
correctly is you need to give
it at least two numbers.